stateful deployments: concept and jobspec documentation (#25288)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/docs/concepts/stateful-deployments.mdx

---
layout: docs

> page_title: Stateful Deployments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
page_title: Stateful deployments
```

description: |-

>   Learn how Nomad handles Stateful Deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Learn how Nomad handles stateful deployments. Use a dynamic host volume for your stateful workload and bind an allocation to a volume ID with the sticky parameter. Learn how Nomad scales jobs with sticky volumes. 
```

Updating the description to include more of what is on the page because developer.hashicorp.com indexes the front matter description for the site search. The local site search does not index page contents.

---

> # Stateful Deployments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Stateful deployments
```

style: [sentence case for page titles and headings](https://github.com/hashicorp/tutorials/blob/main/STYLE_GUIDE.md#titles-and-headings)

> <Note>
> Stateful deployments support only dynamic host volumes. For CSI volumes, we have
> <a href="/nomad/docs/job-specification/volume#per_alloc">per_alloc</a> property
> that serves a similar purpose.
> </Note>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>

Stateful deployments support only dynamic host volumes. For CSI volumes, use the
[`per_alloc` property](/nomad/docs/job-specification/volume#per_alloc), 
which serves a similar purpose.

</Note>
```

You can use markdown in a `<Note>` if you put a blank space before and after the note content. 

Replaced "we have" with "use" -> tell the reader what to use

Author: oh that's cool, I didn't know this about spacing+markdown.

> Nomad stateful deployments allow users to effectively bind their jobs to host
> [volumes]. On a lower level, this means taking Nomad's basic unit of workload
> placement—the [allocation]—and making it possible for users to have allocations
> that are ["sticky"] to volume IDs. Since stateful deployments only support
> dynamic host volumes, using them effectively means binding a job to a particular
> node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nomad stateful deployments let you effectively bind your jobs to host [volumes].
On a lower level, this means taking Nomad's basic unit of workload placement,
the [allocation], and making it possible for you to have allocations that are
[sticky] to volume IDs. Since stateful deployments only support dynamic host
volumes, using them effectively means binding a job to a particular node.
```

style: [address the reader as "you"](https://github.com/hashicorp/tutorials/blob/main/STYLE_GUIDE.md#use-the-grammatical-person-you-for-the-practitioner)

> Stateful Deployments work on a per-task-group basis, that is, each task group
> can indicate that a host volume it requires must be "sticky." This is done by
> setting the parameter in the jobspec:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stateful deployments work on a per-task-group basis. Use the `volume.sticky` parameter in your job specification to indicate that each task group requires a sticky host volume.

This example sets the volume's `sticky` parameter to `true`.
```

some style and grammar nits

```hcl
job "app" {
  group "example" {
    # ...
    volume "example" {
      type      = "host"
      source    = "ca-certificates"
      read_only = true
      sticky    = true
    }
    # ...
  }
}
```

> If you set the volume to "sticky," during the deployment the scheduler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you set the volume to sticky, during the deployment the scheduler
```

removed quotes

associates its ID with the task group that uses it. Stateful deployments require

> that any allocations belonging to that task group will only be (re)placed on
> nodes that have this volume ID available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that any allocations belonging to that task group must be places or replaced on
nodes that have this volume ID available.
```

present tense

Scaling jobs with sticky volumes up results in more volume IDs claimed by the
task group, but scaling jobs down does not delete unused volumes, nor does it
touch the data present on them.

> If the scheduler cannot find a node that has the right volume ID present
> (perhaps because the node is down or disconnected), a blocked evaluation is
> created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the scheduler cannot find a node that has the right volume ID present,
perhaps because the node is down or disconnected, Nomad creates a blocked evaluation.
```

Style: active voice. Also, we don't want to put information in parentheses because reader often skip over content that is inside of them.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Related resources

Refer to the following Nomad pages for more information about stateful workloads and volumes:

- [Considerations for Stateful Workloads](/nomad/docs/operations/stateful-workloads) explores the options for persistent storage of workloads running in Nomad.
- The [Nomad volume specification][volumes] defines the schema for creating and registering volumes. 
- The [job specification `volume` block](/nomad/docs/job-specification/volume) lets you configure a group that requires a specific volume from the cluster.
- The [Stateful Workloads](/nomad/tutorials/stateful-workloads) tutorials explore techniques to run jobs that require access to persistent storage.
 
```

[allocation]: /nomad/docs/glossary#allocation

> ["sticky"]: /nomad/docs/job-specification/volume#sticky

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[sticky]: /nomad/docs/job-specification/volume#sticky
```

---
layout: docs
page_title: Stateful Deployments
description: |-
  Learn how Nomad handles Stateful Deployments.
---

# Stateful Deployments

Nomad Stateful Deployments allow users to effectively bind their jobs to host
[volumes]. On a lower level, this means taking Nomad's basic unit of workload
placement—the [allocation]—and making it possible for users to have allocations
that are ["sticky"] to volume IDs.

<Note>
Stateful Deployments support only Host Volumes. For CSI Volumes, we have <a
href="/nomad/docs/job-specification/volume#per_alloc">per_alloc</a> property
that serves a similar purpose.
</Note>

Stateful Deployments work on a per-task-group basis, that is, each task group
can indicate that a host volume it requires must be "sticky." This is done by
setting the parameter in the jobspec:

```hcl
job "app" {
  group "example" {
    # ...
    volume "example" {
      type      = "host"
      source    = "ca-certificates"
      read_only = true
      sticky    = true
    }
    # ...
  }
}
```

If a volume is set to be sticky, during the deployment the scheduler adds its
ID to the allocation that uses it. Stateful deployments require that any

> allocation that has the new VolumeID field set will only be (re)scheduled on

Reviewer 2: Didn't we drop the "volume ID" field on the allocs? Should this discuss the claims object instead?

nodes that have this Volume ID attached.

> Allocations that need to be rescheduled due to a destructive update will only

Reviewer 2: We're using the loose definition of "reschedule" that we should probably try to avoid (ref https://github.com/hashicorp/nomad/pull/24929). A destructive update replaces an allocation, whereas a reschedule happens when an allocation fails. The rest of the paragraph applies to both scenarios.

ever be rescheduled on a node that has the host volume ID they used before.
Scaling jobs with sticky volumes up results in more volume IDs claimed by the
task group, but scaling jobs down does not delete unused volumes, nor does it
touch the data present on them.

If the scheduler cannot find a node that has the right volume ID present
(perhaps because the node is down or disconnected), the allocation will be
stopped and the job will remain in `pending` status until it's either stopped

> by the user or a feasible node is found.

Reviewer 2: Saying "the allocation will be stopped" is a little confusing here... I think it's calling back to the previous paragraph where we're talking about rescheduled allocations, but the job would only be in a "pending" status for the first deployment, not reschedules. This paragraph applies for replacements or migrations as well.

Rather than calling out what happens to the old alloc or the job status, we should instead focus this paragraph on the resulting blocked eval. That's the primary symptom that a user will see, and it also includes the detail they need to know about why their alloc isn't getting placed.

}
```

If you set the volume to "sticky," during the deployment the scheduler
associates its ID with the task group that uses it. Stateful deployments require
that any allocations belonging to that task group will only be (re)placed on
nodes that have this volume ID available.

Scaling jobs with sticky volumes up results in more volume IDs claimed by the
task group, but scaling jobs down does not delete unused volumes, nor does it
touch the data present on them.

If the scheduler cannot find a node that has the right volume ID present
(perhaps because the node is down or disconnected), a blocked evaluation is

> created and the job remains in `pending` status until it's either stopped by the

Reviewer 2: I'd consider leaving out the note about the job being in pending status. There are users who read docs at an extremely literal level and will not be able to reason that this clause only applies in the case of an actively deploying job and not, ex. a rescheduled alloc.

Author: [19b2c7b](https://github.com/hashicorp/nomad/pull/25288/commits/19b2c7bbe281582ce1a1956afa6bdfedef8c0a53)
